This is an internally validated, natural language processing-based algorithm for detecting patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis from clinical notes documented in electronic health records systems

Objective: Newer computational phenotype algorithms are developed due to unstable ICD code mapping in structured electronic health records (EHR), leading to looking the source of truth in clinical notes written by experts. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a chronic liver disease characterized by the accumulation of fat in the liver resulting liver inflammation and damage. For accurate identification of NASH diagnosis, that must be made by an expert in this disease, namely a board-certified or board-eligible gastroenterologist or hepatologist with an active clinical practice that includes this patient population. Thus, the source of truth concerning this diagnosis will be the clinical notes authored by these clinicians. The study objective is to develop a natural language processing (NLP) method to computationally ascertain this from the notes.

Methods: We developed an NLP method using clinical notes written by experts from hepatology department. Initially notes were processed into different sections using regular expressions and MedSpacy sectionizer tool. The notes were further filtered with the condition of a specific section called ‘Assessment and Plan’ using regular expression based searching.  Next, we looked for the mention of ‘NASH’ in this specific section using regular expression based keyword searching. Again the notes are filtered based on the condition of author of the note as a specialist. Finally, among multiple notes for each patient the earliest NASH mention is identified and used as index date of the NASH cohort.

